# Lab 8

## Ex1

#### Implementation of `sfs_io_nolock()`
- The core of the function is left for us to complete, which is to copy `buf` to the file represented by `sin` or from `sin` to `buf`.  
- Two sets of sub functions, include `sfs_w/rbuf()` and `sfs_w/rblock()` are important for the implementation. 
    - The first ones correspond to IO between buffer and part of a single block, whereas latter ones correspond to IO between buffer and several integrated blocks.
    - The funcions rely on the index of the block in the file rather than in `inode` structures, which could be obtained by `sfs_bmap_load_nolock()`.
- As the start and end position involving IO in the file may not be aligned to blocks, the IO process should be separated to 3 parts, which are:
    1. Rounding the start position to the nearest block and dealing with the margin, if any.
    2. Dealing with the middle of the region comprised of integrated blocks, if any.
    3. Dealing with the "tail" that get neglected because it is smaller than a whole block in the previous step, if any.
- The total amount (Bytes) of data copied should be recorded in `alen` and it should be pass back by using `alenp` pointer.

#### The Design Principle of "PIPE" in UNIX
- PIPE is used for interprocess communication based on a producer-consumer model. The effect is to make the output of a process to be the input of another process.
- When a PIPE is requested, created a PIPE using one physical page and map a virtual file to the physical page.
- The stdout of the process and the stdin of the other process is redirected to this file. When the file is empty of full, one of the 2 processes are blocked.

#### Differences from the Answer Provided.
- Almost the same.

#### List of Knowledge
- The principle of simple file system.

## Ex2

#### Implementation of `load_icode()` Based on a File System
- The function is sophisticated but luckily most of its code could be copied from `load_icode()` in lab7 with 2 part of it to be adjusted.
    1. The first part is how to build `void * binary` from a file descriptor.
        1. Acquire the size of the file to be read using `sysfile_fstat()` and alloc such space in kernel with `kmalloc()`.
        2. Copy the file to the `binary` pointer using `load_icode_read()`. Be careful to free such space when the loading codes are over.
    2. The second part is how to setup arguments for the executed process in user stack.
        - The arguments, namely `argc` and `kargv`, have already been copied to the kernel so that after `mm` have changed, the variables are stil accessable in the function.
        - However, the spaces in kernel are to be released in `do_execve()`, so it should be copied to user stack. 
            1. Alloc page from the high address (`USTACKTOP`) for each argument, and copy the argument to the pages using `strncpy()` with EXEC_MAX_ARG_LEN + 1 as max length.
            2. Build a array of pointer points to each of the argument.
            3. Push the staring address of the array and the number of arguments `argc` to the stack right on the array.
        - The esp in the trapframe should be set to point to where `argc` is stored, according to the `_start` part of the disassembly of `sh.c`.

#### Hard Links and Symbolic Links in UNIX
- To create a hard link, create a new `sfs_inode` that point to a previously existed `sfs_disk_inode`.
- To create a symbolic link, create a new file that point to a previously existed `sfs_inode`. And every time loading files check if it's a symbolic link and jump to the corresponding `sfs_inode` if so.

#### Differences from the Answer Provided.
- The answer chooses to read the file step by step in the stackframe of the function rather than using `kmalloc()`.
    - Mine is simpler and more compatible with previous codes and the answer will perform better when the file is large.
- The answer builds the argument array in a compact way so it's better than my implementation. However in current situation the number of argument is not large so the difference is not significant.

#### List of Knowledge
- The meaning of syscall `execve`.
- The structure of stackframe.
