# Lab 4

## Ex1

#### Implement *alloc_proc*

1. Alloc memory for the PCB in the kernel using *kmalloc()*.
2. Initialize the PCB by setting all of the contents to 0 using *memset()*. The value of the member variables of *struct proc_struct* are not set correctlly and it's not the job for this function.
3. However, some fields could or should be initialized to be some certain value.  
    - *proc->state* should be set to *PROC_UNINIT*, however the value of *PROC_UNINIT* is 0 so nothing should be done.
    - *proc->pid* should be set to -1, for if the pid of the PCB is 0 then the PCB corresponds to the first process in the OS (idle process).
    - *proc->cr3* should be set to *boot_cr3*. This is a default value for kernel processes. If process would use a different cr3, *proc->cr3* is set to a different value later.

#### What are the meanings of *struct context context* and *struct trapframe \*tf* ?
- *struct context context*
    - the struct contains values of %eip and 7 general purpose registers (except for %eax which is used when switching context). 
    - The contents is saved and restored when switching processes. By doing so CPU is able to change to the context of a different piece of code in *proc_run*
- *struct trapframe \*tf*
    - pointer to the trapframe related to the trap which causes the current kernel code to run.
    - The pointer is set whenever a trap is entered. The struct provides essential infomation for system calls, such as values of all registers in user mode, aka arguments.

#### Differences from the answer provided.
- The answer cleared the member variables one by one instead of using memset to clear the whole struct. The effect is the same and it's hard to say which is better.

## Ex2

#### Implement *do_fork*
1. Alloc the PCB. Check the return value. If it's correct, set the parent of the child process as current process.
2. Alloc a kernel stack for the new process using *setup_kstack*. Check the return value. If it went wrong free the PCB.
3. Alloc(copy) a user virtual memory area for the process. In this exp it does nothing because only kernel process is generated. Check the return value. If it wen wrong free the PCB and kernel stack.
4. Setup the context of the process by calling *copy_thread*.
    - The trapframe is basically the same with the parent process and it's stored at the bottom of kernel stack of the newly created process.
    - The return value of the system call which is stored in %eax should be set to 0 indicating this is a child process.
    - The %esp in the trapframe is set to 0 in *kernel_thread* for no crossing rings happens when switching to kernel processes.
    - Enable interruption because when the process is scheduled for the first time the interruption is disabled.
    - The context of the child process in PCB is set to be the entrance of *forkret*. The %esp in the context is set to make room for a function call to *forkrets*.
5. Alloc a uniqe PID for the process.
6. Add the process to process list and process hash table.
7. Set the status of the process to be *PROC_RUNNALBE*.
8. Set return value to be the PID of the process.

#### Is Ucore able to alloc a unique PID for eash process?
- As long as the number of processes is smaller than *MAX_PROCESS*, ucore is able to alloc a unique PID for the process.
- The implementation is in *get_pid()*, which maintains the last PID allocated as *last_pid* and the PID from last PID to which all PIDs are available to be allocated as *next_safe*.
- Each time the function is called, *last_pid* is increased by 1. If it reaches the maximum of PID number, it is reset to 1, and if it becomes equal to *next_safe*, find a new *next_safe*.
    1. Reset *next_pid* to the maximum PID number.
    2. Traverse the process list, decrease *next_pid* if any processes with PID larger than *last_pid* and smaller than *next_safe* is found.
    3. If *last_pid* happens to be equal to one of the PID of process in the list, increase *last_pid* and start over again.
- Otherwise the value in *last_pid* is returned as a PID number that are different from any other processes in the OS.

#### Differences from the answer provided.
- Forget to set the parent of the newly created process. Corrected now.
- Forget to increment *nr_process*. Corrected now.
- Doesn't tried to save and restore interruption flag. Corrected now.

## Ex3

#### Analysis of *proc_run*
1. The purpose of this function is to set the argument of the function to be the current running process. 
2. First check if the current running process is the process set to be switched to. If so, do nothing.
3. Then prepare to block interruption and restore it later because the switching process need to be atomic. If interruption happens during the switching process, errors would occur.
4. Set the global variable *current* to be the new the process.
5. Set the value for kernel stack %esp in TSS. This makes sure that if the process need to switch from user stack to kernel stack it'll switch to its own kernel stack.
6. Load the new cr3. This makes sure that the new process would find it's own physical addresses by virtual addresses potentially the same with those of other processes.
7. call *switch_to* to save the context of the previous process and load the context of the new process.

#### How many kernel threads are created in the experiment?
- 2 kernel threads are created. 
    1. The first one is idle process which is the thread that has been running since the entrance or even bootloading of ucore.
    2. The second one is manually created by calling *kernel_thread*. The content of the thread is to print some message to demonstrate the system works.

#### The purpose of *local_intr_save...*
- Disable interruption temporarily to make sure that the operation in the colons are not disturbed by interruption.
