# Lab 7

## Ex1

#### Analysis of Semaphore at Kernel Level 
- Each semaphore is consist of a value and a waiting queue in which threads on the semaphore sleep.
    - The waiting queue is basically a doubly linked list with some special parameter checks and APIs such as `wait_queue_first()` which is used for picking the first element (wait_t) of the queue.
- To initialize a semaphore, set its value according to the parameter, and initialize its waiting queue using `wait_queue_init()`.
- Two operations on a initialized semaphore, namely `up()` and `down()`, are available. Instructions in these functions will change the semaphore and thus basically within the critical section.
    - `up()` tries to increase the value in a semaphore, however, if there are threads sleeping on the semaphore, which means the value is "negative", it will wake up one of these threads instead.
    - `down()` tries to decrease the value in a semaphore, however, if the semaphore is 0, it will make the current thread sleeping on the semaphore and call `schedule()` to yield the control on CPU.

#### How Semaphore Helps to Resolve the Dining Philosophers Problem.
- Assuming there are N philosophers, 1+N semaphores are necessary to resolve the dining philosophers problem.
    - The first semaphore is a global mutex, it guarentees at one time, only one philosopher can check or change the status of knives and forks beside him.
    - The other semaphores are related to the status of philosophers.
- When a philosopher stops thinking and want to eat, he will first try to check the status of knives and forks beside him. And if there are others doing the same thing, he'll sleep on the mutex semaphore.
- By doing the check he is actually inspecting the status of philosophers beside him. If they are not eating then it means he can eat, otherwise he'll mark himself as hungry and sleep on his own semaphore.
- When he finishes eating, he'll check the status of philosophers beside him, if they are hungry (and sleeping because he is eating) and their neighbors aren't eating, he'll wake them up and let them eat.

#### Differences between Semaphores at Kernel Level and User Level.
- The principles are bacailly the same. However, semaphores at user level should rely on system calls to implement atomic operations.

#### List of Knowledge
- How ucore implements atomic operation to support synchronization/mutual exclusion (disable interruption).
- How semaphores are implemented.
- The idea of a classic synchronization/mutual exclusion problem (dining philosopher).

## Ex2

#### Analysis of Condition Variable at Kernel Level 
- In principle, condition variables are the same with semaphores, the implementation of condition variables in ucore are based on semaphores.
    - Apart from a semaphore, a condition variable also contains an integer counting the number of threads waiting on the semaphore and the pointer pointing the owner (a monitor).
- The monitor managing a group of condition variables contains a global mutex to guarentee at one time only one thread can use the monitor, and a semaphore to pause the monitor itself.
- The same as semaphores, 2 operations are available for condition variables, which are `cond_signal()` and `cond_wait()`.
    - If there are threads sleeping on a condition variable, `cond_signal()` will wake up one of the threads and make the current thread sleep on the semaphore `next` , otherwise it'll do nothing.
    - `cond_wait()` will make a thread sleep on a certain condition variable. It will not yield the mutex immediately if there are threads sleeping on the semaphore `next`.

#### How Condition Variable Helps to Resolve the Dining Philosophers Problem.
- Basically the same as those in Ex1, a monitor is initialized to help control the status of the philosophers.
- When a philosopher wish to eating but failed because there are other philosophers biside him eating, it'll sleep on his condition variable using `cond_wait()`.
- When a philosopher has finished eating, he'll send a signal using `cond_signal()` to sleeping (hungry) philosophers around him who's neighbors are now not eating, so that they'll wake up and begin eating.

#### Differences between Condition Variables at Kernel Level and User Level.
- The principles are bacailly the same. However, condition variables at user level should rely on system calls to implement atomic operations.

#### Differences from the Answer Provided.
- Almost the same.

#### List of Knowledge
- How monitor is implemented and its relationship with semaphores.
