# Lab 6

## Ex1

#### Analysis of `sched_class`.
- Effect of all pointers in `sched_class`.
    1. `name` points to the string recording the name of the scheduler.
    2. `init` is a function pointer which points to the function to initialize the scheduler. Typically the function is only called once in `kern_init()` wrapped up by `sched_init()`.
    3. `enqueue` is a function pointer used for putting a process into run queue. Usually the function is called when waking up processes and scheduling.
    4. `dequeue` is a function pointer used for deleting a process from the run queue. The function is called after the next process is picked while scheduling.
    5. `pick_next` is a function pointer used for picking the next process from the run queue. The function is called while deciding the next process to run while scheduling.
    6. `proc_tick` is a function pointer used for changing the status of the scheduler every time slice, usually called in timer interruption.
- How does ucore schedule?
    - The interface exposed to the outside includes `sched_init`, `wakeup_proc` and `schedule`.
    - `sched_init` is used to initialize the scheduler and is only called once.
    - `wakeup_proc` is used to set the status of the process to be runnable, which usually happens when a new process is created or sleeping time is over.
        - In RR, this is usually achieved by adding the process to the end of the run queue (doubly linked list).
    - `schedule` is used to change the current running process to the next process, typically called in `trap()`, aka every time OS enters trap.
        - In RR, the next process is picked from the head of the run queue.
- Design of multi level feedback queue algorithm.
    - Based on RR algorithm. Instead of using only 1 queue, use multiple queues with different priority and time slice. The lower priority, the longer time slice.
    - While scheduling, first pick processes in the queue with highest priority, then second highest priority, and so on.
    - When a new process is added to the queues (the status is `PROC_UNINIT`), put it into the queue with highest priority.
    - A process in a certain queue is put into lower priority queue if and only if its time slice is used up and it's status is still `PROC_RUNNABLE`.
    -
- tf_ds=tf_es=tf_ss should be set to be USER_DS.
- tf_esp should point to the top addr of user stack, aka USTACKTOP.
- tf_eip should be set to be the entry point of this binary program, which is defined by elf->e_entry.
- tf_eflags should be set to enable computer to produce interrupt and access IO (optional).

#### What happens from a process being chosen to run to the process executing its first instruction.
1. The process is chosen to run in *schedule()*. The function call *proc_run()* to switch the current process to the new process.
2. In *proc_run()*, %esp in TSS and the address of PTD in %cr3 are set according to the PCB of the chosen process. Then call *switch_to()* to switch the context.
3. In *switch_to()*, the context of the current process is saved, including all general purpose registers and the instruction pointer %eip, except for %eax which is used in the switching process.
4. Then the context of the chosen process defined in the PCB is restored to the registers. The instructions in the process begins to run after %eip is restored.
 

#### Differences from the answer provided.
- The answer does not set the IOPL bit. I think both are OK.

#### List of knowledge
- The format of elf files.
- The mechanism of trap.
- The 'process' of switching 'process'.

## Ex2

#### Finish *copy_range* by implementing the copying memory part.
- Copy the physical memory in the old page frame to the new page frame by *memcpy()*. It is note worthy that the addresses of the pages should be kernel virtual addresses.
- Establish the mapping of the physical page the the linear addres by calling *page_insert()*.

#### How to implement CoW?
- When a process is forked, do not copy all of the physical memory. Instead, map all PTEs in the new page table to the previously mapped pages and set them to be read only.
- When a page fault happens, check if the user program tries to write to a certain memory address and it's writable in vma and not writeable in PTE.
- If so, it means the page is currently shared by 2 or more processes. Copy the physical page and reestablish the mapping, and set the new PTE to be writable.
- When the interruption returns, the page should be able to be written normally, and the other copy of the page remains unaffected.


#### Differences from the answer provided.
- None.
#### List of knowledge
- The relation between parent process and child process.
- The implementation of *do_fork()*.
- The meaning of Copy on Write.

## Ex3

#### Analysis of fork/exec/wait/exit.
- *do_fork()* is completely implemented in lab4/5, a detailed analysis could be found in these reports.
- *do_execve()* replaces the contently of current process with a new process.
    1. First, the content of the old process, mainly the memory, is reclaimed by *exit_mmap()*, *put_pgdir()* and *mm_destroy()*.
    2. Second, a new process from elf file in memory (or disk in future exps) is loaded as the content of the process by *load_icode()*.
- *do_wait()* will scan the child processes of the current process, if any of them are in zombie state, reclaim its resource. Otherwise switch the state of the current process to be *PROC_SLEEPING* and repeat when rescheduled.
- *do_exit()* will reclaim the resource of the current process and wakeup its parent process. If the process doing exit has child processes, set the parent of the child processes to be the *initproc*.

#### How these functions affect the status of the process?
Note: The effect of the diagram may vary in different mardown viewers. Reading source file is recommended.

```
-----------------------------
process state changing:
                                            
  alloc_proc                                 RUNNING
      +                                   +--<----<--+
      +                                   + proc_run +
      V                                   +-->---->--+ 
PROC_UNINIT -- proc_init/wakeup_proc --> PROC_RUNNABLE -- try_free_pages/do_wait/do_sleep --> PROC_SLEEPING --
                                           A      +                                                           +
                                           |      +--- do_exit --> PROC_ZOMBIE                                +
                                           +                                                                  + 
                                           -----------------------wakeup_proc----------------------------------
-----------------------------
```

####
- Life cycle and status of process.
- Important system calls.

